



Network Working Group                                         E. Kinnear
Internet-Draft                                                  T. Pauly
Intended status: Standards Track                                 C. Wood
Expires: March 20, 2020                                       Apple Inc.
                                                              P. McManus
                                                                  Fastly
                                                      September 17, 2019


           Adaptive DNS: Improving Privacy of Name Resolution
                draft-pauly-adaptive-dns-privacy-latest

Abstract

   This document defines an architecture that allows clients to
   dynamically discover designated resolvers that offer encrypted DNS
   services, and use them in an adaptive way that improves privacy while
   co-existing with locally provisioned resolvers.  These resolvers can
   be used directly when looking up names for which they are designated.
   These resolvers also provide the ability to proxy encrypted queries,
   thus hiding the identity of the client requesting resolution.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 20, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Specification of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Client Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Discovering Designated DoH Servers  . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       3.1.1.  Whitelisting Designated DoH Servers . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.1.2.  Accessing Extended Information  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.2.  Discovering Local Resolvers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.3.  Hostname Resolution Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.4.  Oblivious Resolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  Server Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.1.  Provide a DoH Server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.1.1.  Oblivious DoH Proxy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.1.2.  Oblivious DoH Target  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.1.3.  Keying Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.2.  Advertise the DoH Server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.3.  Provide Extended Configuration as a Web PvD . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Server Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.1.  Single Content Provider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.2.  Multiple Content Providers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.3.  Avoid Narrow Deployments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   6.  Local Resolver Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.1.  Local Designated DoH Servers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7.  Performance Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     9.1.  DoH Template PvD Key  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     9.2.  DoH URI Template DNS Parameter  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   10. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18

1.  Introduction

   When clients need to resolve names into addresses in order to
   establish networking connections, they traditionally use by default
   the DNS resolver that is provisioned by the local network along with




Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   their IP address.  Alternatively, they can use a resolver indicated
   by a tunneling service such as a VPN.

   However, privacy-sensitive clients might prefer to use an encrypted
   DNS service other than the one locally provisioned in order to
   prevent interception, profiling, or modification by entities other
   than the operator of the name service for the name being resolved.
   Protocols that can improve the transport security of a client when
   using DNS or creating TLS connections include DNS-over-TLS [RFC7858],
   DNS-over-HTTPS [RFC8484], and encrypted Server Name Indication (ESNI)
   [I-D.ietf-tls-esni].

   There are several concerns around a client using such privacy-
   enhancing mechanisms for generic system traffic.  A remote service
   that provides encrypted DNS may not provide correct answers for
   locally available resources, or private resources (such as domains
   only accessible over a private network).  Remote services may also be
   untrusted from a privacy perspective: while encryption will prevent
   on-path observers from seeing hostnames, client systems need to trust
   the encrypted DNS service to not store or misuse queries made to it.
   Further, extensive use of cloud based recursive resolvers obscures
   the network location of the client which may degrade the performance
   of the returned server due to lack of proximity at the benefit of
   improved privacy.

   Client systems are left with choosing between one of the following
   stances:

   1.  Send all application DNS queries to a particular encrypted DNS
       service, which requires establishing user trust of the service.
       This can lead to resolution failures for local or private
       enterprise domains absent heuristics or other workarounds for
       detecting managed networks.

   2.  Allow the user or another entity to configure local policy for
       which domains to send to local, private, or encrypted resolvers.
       This provides more granularity at the cost of increasing user
       burden.

   3.  Only use locally-provisioned resolvers, and opportunistically use
       encrypted DNS to these resolvers when possible.  (Clients may
       learn of encrypted transport support by actively probing such
       resolvers.)  This provides marginal benefit over not using
       encrypted DNS at all, especially if clients have no means of
       authenticating or trusting local resolvers.

   This document defines an architecture that allows clients to improve
   the privacy of their DNS queries without requiring user intervention,



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   and allowing coexistence with local, private, and enterprise
   resolvers.

   This architecture is composed of several mechanisms:

   o  A DNS record that indicates a designated DoH server associated
      with a name (Section 3.1);

   o  an extension to DoH that allows client IP addresses to be
      disassociated from queries via proxying ([OBLIVIOUS]);

   o  a DoH server that responds to queries directly and supports
      proxying (Section 4);

   o  and client behavior rules for how to resolve names using a
      combination of designated DoH resolvers, proxied queries, and
      local resolvers (Section 3).

1.1.  Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Terminology

   This document defines the following terms:

   Adaptive DNS:  Adaptive DNS is a technique to provide an encrypted
      transport for DNS queries that can be sent directly to a
      Designated DoH Server, use Oblivious DoH to hide the client IP
      address, or use Direct Resolvers when required or appropriate.

   Designated DoH Server:  A DNS resolver that provides connectivity
      over HTTPS (DoH) that is designated as a responsible resolver for
      a given domain or zone.

   Direct Resolver:  A DNS resolver using any transport that is
      provisioned directly by a local router or a VPN.

   Exclusive Direct Resolver:  A Direct Resolver that requires the
      client to use it exclusively for a given set of domains, such as
      private domains managed by a VPN.  This status is governed by
      local system policy.





Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   Oblivious DoH:  A technique that uses multiple DoH servers to proxy
      queries in a way that disassociates the client's IP address from
      query content.

   Oblivious Proxy:  A resolution server that proxies encrypted client
      DNS queries to another resolution server that will be able to
      decrypt the query (the Oblivious Target).

   Oblivious Target:  A resolution server that receives encrypted client
      DNS queries via an Oblivious Proxy.

   Privacy-Sensitive Connections:  Connections made by clients that are
      explicitly Privacy-Sensitive are treated differently from
      connections made for generic system behavior, such as non-user-
      initiated maintenance connections.  This distinction is only
      relevant on the client, and does not get communicated to other
      network entities.  Certain applications, such as browsers, can
      choose to treat all connections as privacy-sensitive.

   Web PvD:  A Web Provisioning Domain, or Web PvD, represents the
      configuration of resolvers, proxies, and other information that a
      server deployment makes available to clients.  See Section 4.3.

3.  Client Behavior

   Adaptive DNS allows client systems and applications to improve the
   privacy of their DNS queries and connections both by requiring
   confidentiality via encryption and by limiting the ability to
   correlate client IP addresses with query contents.  Specifically, the
   goal for client queries is to achieve the following properties:

   1.  No party other than the client and server can learn or control
       the names being queried by the client or the answers being
       returned by the server.

   2.  Only a designated DNS resolver associated with the deployment
       that is also hosting content will be able to read both the client
       IP address and queried names for Privacy-Sensitive Connections.
       For example, a resolver owned and operated by the same provider
       which hosts "example.com" would be able to link queries for
       "example.com" to specific clients (by their IP address), since
       the server ultimately has this capability once clients
       subsequently establish secure (e.g., TLS) connections to an
       address to which "example.com" resolves.

   3.  Clients will be able to comply with policies required by VPNs and
       local networks that are authoritative for private domains.




Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   An algorithm for determining how to resolve a given name in a manner
   that satisfies these properties is described in Section 3.3.  Note
   that this algorithm does not guarantee that responses that are not
   signed with DNSSEC are valid, and clients that establish connections
   to unsigned addresses may still expose their local IP addresses to
   attackers that control their terminal resolver even if hidden during
   resolution.

3.1.  Discovering Designated DoH Servers

   All direct (non-oblivious) queries for names in privacy-sensitive
   connections MUST be sent to a server that both provides encryption
   and is designated for the domain.

   Clients dynamically build and maintain a set of known Designated DoH
   Servers.  The information that is associated with each server is:

   o  The URI Template of the DoH server [RFC8484]

   o  The public HPKE [I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke] key of the DoH server used
      for proxied oblivious queries, as defined in [OBLIVIOUS]

   o  A list of domains for which the DoH server is designated

   This information can be retrieved from several different sources.
   The primary source for discovering Designated DoH Server
   configurations is from properties stored in a SVCB (or a SVCB-
   conformant type like HTTPSSVC) DNS Record
   [I-D.nygren-httpbis-httpssvc].  This record provides the URI Template
   and the public Oblivious DoH key of a DoH server that is designated
   for a specific domain.  A specific domain may have more than one such
   record.

   In order to designate a DoH server for a domain, a SVCB record can
   add the "dohuri", which has a SvcParamKey value of 4.  The value
   stored in the parameter is a URI, which is the DoH URI template
   [RFC8484].

   The format for the parameter that contains the public key of the DoH
   server is defined in [OBLIVIOUS].

   The following example shows a record containing a DoH URI, as
   returned by a query for the HTTPSSVC variant of the SVCB record type
   on "example.com".







Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   example.com.      7200  IN HTTPSSVC 0 svc.example.net.
   svc.example.net.  7200  IN HTTPSSVC 2 svc1.example.net. (
                                       dohuri=https://doh.example.net/dns-query
                                       odohkey="..." )

   Clients MUST ignore any DoH server URI that was not retrieved from a
   DNSSEC-signed record [RFC4033].

   When a client resolves a name (based on the order in Section 3.3) it
   SHOULD determine the Designated DoH Server via a SVCB record for any
   name that does not fall within known Designated DoH Server's
   configuration.  The client MAY also issue queries for the SVCB record
   for more specific names to discover further Designated DoH Servers.

   In order to bootstrap discovery of Designated DoH Servers, client
   systems SHOULD have some saved list of at least two names that they
   use consistently to perform SVCB record queries on the Direct
   Resolvers configured by the local network.  Since these queries are
   likely not private, they SHOULD NOT be associated with user action or
   contain user-identifying content.  Rather, the expection is that all
   client systems of the same version and configuration would issue the
   same bootstrapping queries when joining a network for the first time
   when the list of Designated DoH Servers is empty.

3.1.1.  Whitelisting Designated DoH Servers

   Prior to using a Designated DoH Server for direct name queries on
   privacy-sensitive connections, clients MUST whitelist the server.

   The requirements for whitelisting are:

   o  Support for acting as an Oblivious Proxy.  Each Designated DoH
      Server is expected to support acting as a proxy for Oblivious DoH.
      A client MUST issue at least one query that is proxied through the
      server before sending direct queries to the server.

   o  Support for acting as an Oblivious Target.  Each Designated DoH
      Server is expected to support acting as a target for Oblivious
      DoH.  A client MUST issue at least one query that is targeted at
      the server through a proxy before sending direct queries to the
      server.

   Clients MAY further choose to restrict the whitelist by other local
   policy.  For example, a client system can have a list of trusted
   resolver configurations, and it can limit the whitelist of Designated
   DoH Servers to configurations that match this list.  Alternatively, a
   client system can check a server against a list of audited and
   approved DoH Servers that have properties that the client approves.



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   Clients SHOULD NOT whitelist authority mappings for effective top-
   level domains (eTLDs), such as ".com".

3.1.2.  Accessing Extended Information

   When a Designated DoH Server is discovered, clients SHOULD also check
   to see if this server provides an extended configuration in the form
   of a Web PvD Section 4.3.  To do this, the client performs a GET
   request to the DoH URI, indicating that it accepts a media type of
   "application/pvd+json" ([I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains]) and
   with empty query and fragment components.

   In response, the server will return the JSON content for the PvD, if
   present.  The content-type MUST be "application/pvd+json".

   The following exchange shows an example of a client retrieving a Web
   PvD configuration for a DoH server with the URI Template
   "https://dnsserver.example.net/dns-query".

   The client sends:

   :method = GET
   :scheme = https
   :authority = dnsserver.example.net
   :path = /dns-query
   accept = application/pvd+json

   And the server replies:

   :status = 200
   content-type = application/pvd+json
   content-length = 175
   cache-control = max-age=86400

   <JSON content of the Web PvD>

   If the server does not support retrieving any extended PvD
   information, it MUST reply with HTTP status code 415 (Unsupported
   Media Type, [RFC7231]).

   If the retrieved JSON contains a "dnsZones" array
   ([I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains]), the client SHOULD perform
   an SVCB record lookup of each of the listed zones on the DoH server
   and validate that the DoH server is a designated server for the
   domain; and if it is, add the domain to the local configuration.






Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


3.2.  Discovering Local Resolvers

   If the local network provides configuration with an Explicit
   Provisioning Domain (PvD), as defined by
   [I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains], clients can learn about
   domains for which the local network's resolver is authoritative.

   If an RA provided by the router on the network defines an Explicit
   PvD that has additional information, and this additional information
   JSON dictionary contains the key "dohTemplate" Section 9, then the
   client SHOULD add this DoH server to its list of known DoH
   configurations.  The domains that the DoH server claims authority for
   are listed in the "dnsZones" key.  Clients MUST use a SVCB record
   from the locally-provisioned DoH server and validate the answer with
   DNSSEC [RFC4033] before creating a mapping from the domain to the
   server.  Once this has been validated, clients can use this server
   for resolution as described in step 2 of Section 3.3.

   See Section 6 for local deployment considerations.

3.3.  Hostname Resolution Algorithm

   When establishing a secure connection to a certain hostname, clients
   need to first determine which resolver configuration ought to be used
   for DNS resolution.  Given a specific hostname, the order of
   preference for which resolver to use SHOULD be:

   1.  An Exclusive Direct Resolver, such as a resolver provisioned by a
       VPN, domain rules that include the hostname being resolved.  If
       the resolution fails, the connection will fail.  See Section 3.2
       and Section 6.

   2.  A Direct Resolver, such as a local router, with domain rules that
       are known to be authoritative for the domain containing the
       hostname.  If the resolution fails, the connection will try the
       next resolver configuration based on this list.

   3.  The most specific Designated DoH Server that has been whitelisted
       (Section 3.1.1) for the domain containing the hostname, i.e., the
       designated DoH server which is associated with the longest
       matching prefix of the hostname.  For example, given two
       Designated DoH Servers, one for foo.example.com and another
       example.com, clients connecting to bar.foo.example.com should use
       the former.  If the resolution fails, the connection will try an
       Oblivious DoH query.

   4.  Oblivious DoH queries using multiple DoH Servers (Section 3.4).
       If this resolution fails, Privacy-Sensitive Connections will



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


       fail.  All other connections will use the last resort, the
       default Direct Resolvers.

   5.  The default Direct Resolver, generally the resolver provisioned
       by the local router, is used as the last resort for any
       connection that is not explicitly Privacy-Sensitive.

   If the system allows the user to specify a preferred encrypted
   resolver, such as allowing the user to manually configure a DoH
   server URI to use by default, the use of this resolver SHOULD come
   between steps 2 and 3.  This ensures that VPN-managed and locally-
   accessible names remain accessible while all other names are resolved
   using the user preference.

3.4.  Oblivious Resolution

   For all privacy-sensitive connection queries for names that do not
   correspond to a Designated DoH Server, the client SHOULD use
   Oblivious DoH to help conceal its IP address from eavesdroppers and
   untrusted resolvers.

   Disassociation of client IPs from query content is achieved by using
   Oblivious DoH ([OBLIVIOUS]).  This extension to DoH allows a client
   to encrypt a query with a target DoH server's public key, and proxy
   the query through another server.  The query is packaged with a
   unique client-defined symmetric key that is used to sign the DNS
   answer, which is sent back to the client via the proxy.

   All DoH Servers that are used as Designated DoH Servers by the client
   MUST support being both an Oblivious Proxy and an Oblivious Target,
   as described in the server requirements (Section 4).

   Since each Designated DoH Server can act as one of two roles in an
   proxied exchange, there are (N) * (N - 1) / 2 possible pairs of
   servers, where N is the number of whitelisted servers.  While clients
   SHOULD use a variety of server pairs in rotation to decrease the
   ability for any given server to track client queries, it is not
   expected that all possible combinations will be used.  Some
   combinations will be able to handle more load than others, and some
   will have better latency properties than others.  To optimize
   performance, clients SHOULD maintain statistics to track the
   performance characteristics and success rates of particular pairs.

   Clients that are performing Oblivious DoH resolution SHOULD fall back
   to another pair of servers if a first query times out, with a
   locally-determined limit for the number of fallback attempts that
   will be performed.




Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


4.  Server Requirements

   Any server deployment that provides a set of services within one or
   more domains, such as a CDN, can run a server node that allows
   clients to run Adaptive DNS.  A new server node can be added at any
   time, and can be used once it is advertised to clients and can be
   validated and whitelisted.  The system overall is intended to scale
   and provide improved performance as more nodes become available.

   The basic requirements to participate as a server node in this
   architecture are described below.

4.1.  Provide a DoH Server

   Each server node is primarily defined by a DoH server [RFC8484] that
   is designated for a set of domains, and also provides Oblivious DoH
   functionality.  As such, the DoH servers MUST be able to act as
   recursive resolvers that accept queries for records and domains
   beyond those for which the servers are specifically designated.

4.1.1.  Oblivious DoH Proxy

   The DoH servers MUST be able to act as Oblivious Proxies.  In this
   function, they will proxy encrypted queries and answers between
   clients and Oblivious Target DoH servers.

4.1.2.  Oblivious DoH Target

   The DoH servers MUST be able to act as Oblivious Targets.  In this
   function, they will accept encrypted proxied queries from clients via
   Oblivious Proxy DoH servers, and provide encrypted answers using
   client keys.

4.1.3.  Keying Material

   In order to support acting as an Oblivious Target, a DoH server needs
   to provide a public HPKE [I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke] key that can be used to
   encrypt client queries.  This key is advertised in the SVCB record,
   and encoded according to [OBLIVIOUS].

   DoH servers also SHOULD provide an ESNI [I-D.ietf-tls-esni] key to
   encrypt the Server Name Indication field in TLS handshakes to the DoH
   server.








Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


4.2.  Advertise the DoH Server

   The primary mechanism for advertising a Designated DoH Server is a
   SVCB DNS record (Section 3.1).  This record MUST contain both the URI
   Template of the DoH Server as well as the Oblivious DoH Public Key.
   It MAY contain the ESNI key [I-D.ietf-tls-esni].

   Servers MUST ensure that any SVCB records are signed with DNSSEC
   [RFC4033].

4.3.  Provide Extended Configuration as a Web PvD

   Beyond providing basic DoH server functionality, server nodes SHOULD
   provide a mechanism that allows clients to look up properties and
   configuration for the server deployment.  Amongst other information,
   this configuration can optionally contain a list of some popular
   domains for which this server is designated.  Clients can use this
   list to optimize lookups for common names.

   This set of extended configuration information is referred to as a
   Web Provisioning Domain, or a Web PvD.  Provisioning Domains are sets
   of consistent information that clients can use to access networks,
   including rules for resolution and proxying.  Generally, these PvDs
   are provisioned directly, such as by a local router or a VPN.
   [I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains] defines an extensible
   configuration dictionary that can be used to add information to local
   PvD configurations.  Web PvDs share the same JSON configuration
   format, and share the registry of keys defined as "Additional
   Information PvD Keys".

   If present, the PvD JSON configuration MUST be made available to
   clients that request the "application/pvd+json" media type in a GET
   request to the DoH server's URI
   [I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains].  Clients MUST include this
   media type as an Accept header in their GET requests, and servers
   MUST mark this media type as their Content-Type header in responses.
   If the PvD JSON format is not supported, the server MUST reply with
   HTTP status code 415 [RFC7231].

   The "identifier" key in the JSON configuration SHOULD be the hostname
   of the DoH Server itself.

   For Web PvDs, the "prefixes" key within the JSON configuration SHOULD
   contain an empty array.

   The key "dnsZones", which contains an array of domains as strings,
   indicates the zones that belong to the PvD.  Any zone that is listed
   in this array for a Web PvD MUST have a corresponding SVCB record



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   that defines the DoH server as designated for the zone.  Servers
   SHOULD include in this array any names that are considered default or
   well-known for the deployment, but is not required or expected to
   list all zones or domains for which it is designated.  The trade-off
   here is that zones that are listed can be fetched and validated
   automatically by clients, thus removing a bootstrapping step in
   discovering mappings from domains to Designated DoH Servers.

   Clients that retrieve the Web PvD JSON dictionary SHOULD perform an
   SVCB record query for each of the entries in the "dnsZones" array in
   order to populate the mappings of domains.  These MAY be performed in
   an oblivious fashion, but MAY also be queried directly on the DoH
   server (since the information is not user-specific, but in response
   to generic server-driven content).  Servers can choose to pre-
   emptively transfer the relevant SVCB records if the dictionary
   retrieval is done with an HTTP version that supports PUSH semantics.

   This document also registers one new key in the Additional
   Information PvD Keys registry, to identify the URI Template for the
   DoH server Section 9.  When included in Web PvDs, this URI MUST match
   the template in the SVCB DNS Record.

   Beyond providing resolution configuration, the Web PvD configuration
   can be extended to offer information about proxies and other services
   offered by the server deployment.  Such keys are not defined in this
   document.

5.  Server Deployment Considerations

   When servers designate DoH servers for their names, the specific
   deployment model can impact the effective privacy and performance
   characteristics.

5.1.  Single Content Provider

   If a name always resolves to server IP addresses that are hosted by a
   single content provider, the name ought to designate a single DoH
   server.  This DoH server will be most optimal when it is designated
   by many or all names that are hosted by the same content provider.
   This ensures that clients can increase connection reuse to reduce
   latency in connection setup.

   A DoH server that corresponds to the content provider that hosts
   content has an opportunity to tune the responses provided to a client
   based on the location inferred by the client IP address.






Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


5.2.  Multiple Content Providers

   Some hostnames may resolve to server IP addresses that are hosted by
   multiple content providers.  In such scenarios, the deployment may
   want to be able to control the percentage of traffic that flows to
   each content provider.

   In these scenarios, there can either be:

   o  multiple designated DoH servers that are advertised via SVCB DNS
      Records; or,

   o  a single designated DoH server that can be referenced by one or
      more SVCB DNS Records, operated by a party that is aware of both
      content providers and can manage splitting the traffic.

   If a server deployment wants to easily control the split of traffic
   between different content providers, it ought to use the latter model
   of using a single designated DoH server that can better control which
   IP addresses are provided to clients.  Otherwise, if a client is
   aware of multiple DoH servers, it might use a single resolver
   exclusively, which may lead to inconsistent behavior between clients
   that choose different resolvers.

5.3.  Avoid Narrow Deployments

   Using designated DoH servers can improve the privacy of name
   resolution whenever a DoH server is designated by many different
   names within one or more domains.  This limits the amount of
   information leaked to an attacker observing traffic between a client
   and a DoH server: the attacker only learns that the client might be
   resolving one of the many names for which the server is designated
   (or might be performing an Oblivious query).

   However, if a deployment designates a given DoH server for only one
   name, or a very small set of names, then it becomes easier for an
   attacker to infer that a specific name is being accessed by a client.
   For this reason, deployments are encouraged to avoid deploying a DoH
   server that is only designated by a small number of names.  Clients
   can also choose to only whitelist DoH servers that are associated
   with many names.

   Beyond the benefits to privacy, having a larger number of names
   designate a given DoH server improves the opportunity for DoH
   connection reuse, which can improve the performance of name
   resolutions.





Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


6.  Local Resolver Deployment Considerations

   A key goal of Adaptive DNS is that clients will be able to use
   Designated DoH Servers to improve the privacy of queries, without
   entirely bypassing local network authority and policy.  For example,
   if a client is attached to an enterprise Wi-Fi network that provides
   access and resolution for private names not generally accessible on
   the Internet, such names will only be usable when a local resolver is
   used.

   In order to achieve this, a local network can advertise itself as
   authoritative for a domain, allowing it to be used prior to external
   servers in the client resolution algorithm Section 3.3.

6.1.  Local Designated DoH Servers

   If a local network wants to have clients send queries for a set of
   private domains to its own resolver, it needs to define an explicit
   provisioning domain, as defined in
   [I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains].  The PvD RA option SHOULD
   set the H-flag to indicate that Additional Information is available.
   This Additional Information JSON object SHOULD include both the
   "dohTemplate" and "dnsZones" keys to define the local DoH server and
   which domains it claims authority over.

   Although local Designated DoH Servers MAY support proxying Oblivious
   DoH queries, a client SHOULD NOT select one of these servers as an
   Oblivious Proxy.  Doing so might reveal the client's location to the
   Target based on the address of the proxy, which could contribute to
   deanonymizing the client.  Clients can make an exception to this
   behavior if the DoH server designated by the local network is known
   to be a non-local service, such as when a local network configures a
   centralized public resolver to handle its DNS operations.

7.  Performance Considerations

   One of the challenges with cloud-based DNS approaches, such as
   Adaptive DNS, is that the address of the recursive resolver is
   sometimes used as input into DNS geographic load balancing sytems.
   These systems assume the address of the recursive resolver and the
   terminal client are similar.  In other cases, the client's actual
   address is forwarded to the authoritative server by the recursive
   using the EDNS0 Client Subnet feature.  DoH discourages this practice
   privacy reasons.  Sharing this address, while detrimental to privacy,
   can result in better targeted DNS resolutions.

   Adaptive DNS makes the observation that this informaton is sensitive
   when used with, and therefore excluded from, the Target server but is



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   much less sensitive when used with a Designated DoH Server.  This is
   true because the Designated DoH Server controls the value of the
   addressing information being returned to the client.

   Based on these properties, clients SHOULD prefer lookups via
   Designated DoH Servers over oblivious mecahnisms whenever possible.
   Servers can encourgage this by setting large TTLs for SVCB records
   and using longer TTLs for responses returned by their Designated DoH
   Server endpoints which can be more confident they have accurate
   addressing informaton.

8.  Security Considerations

   In order to avoid interception and modification of the information
   retrieved by clients using Adaptive DNS, all exchanges between
   clients and servers are performed over TLS connections.

   Clients must also be careful in determining which DoH servers they
   send queries to directly without proxying.  In order to avoid the
   possibility of a spoofed SVCB record defining a malicious DoH server
   as authoritiative, clients MUST ensure that such records validate
   using DNSSEC [RFC4033].  Even servers that are officially designated
   can risk leaking or logging information about client lookups.  Such
   risk can be mitigated by validating that the DoH servers can present
   proof of logging audits, or by a local whitelist of servers
   maintained by a client.

   Clients should take caution when using Oblivious DoH responses from
   resolvers that do not carry DNSSEC signatures.  An adversarial Target
   resolver that wishes to learn the IP address of clients requesting
   resolution for sensitive domains can redirect clients to addresses of
   its choosing.  Clients that use these answers to open direct
   connections to the server may then leak their local IP address.
   Privacy-Sensitive Connections concerned about this attack SHOULD
   conceal their IP address via a TLS- or HTTP-layer proxy or some other
   tunneling mechanism.

9.  IANA Considerations

9.1.  DoH Template PvD Key

   This document adds a key to the "Additional Information PvD Keys"
   registry, defined by [I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains].








Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   +----------+----------+-------+-------------------------------------+
   | JSON key | Descript | Type  | Example                             |
   |          | ion      |       |                                     |
   +----------+----------+-------+-------------------------------------+
   | dohTempl | DoH URI  | Strin | "https://dnsserver.example.net/dns- |
   | ate      | Template | g     | query{?dns}"                        |
   |          | [RFC8484 |       |                                     |
   |          | ]        |       |                                     |
   +----------+----------+-------+-------------------------------------+

9.2.  DoH URI Template DNS Parameter

   If present, this parameters indicates the URI template of a DoH
   server that is designated for use with the name being resolved.  This
   is a string encoded as UTF-8 characters.

   Name:  dohuri

   SvcParamKey:  4

   Meaning:  URI template for a designated DoH server

   Reference:  This document.

10.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Erik Nygren, Lorenzo Colitti, and Patrick McManus for their
   input on this approach.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains]
              Pfister, P., Vyncke, E., Pauly, T., Schinazi, D., and W.
              Shao, "Discovering Provisioning Domain Names and Data",
              draft-ietf-intarea-provisioning-domains-06 (work in
              progress), August 2019.

   [I-D.ietf-tls-esni]
              Rescorla, E., Oku, K., Sullivan, N., and C. Wood,
              "Encrypted Server Name Indication for TLS 1.3", draft-
              ietf-tls-esni-04 (work in progress), July 2019.

   [I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke]
              Barnes, R. and K. Bhargavan, "Hybrid Public Key
              Encryption", draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke-00 (work in progress),
              July 2019.



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   [I-D.nygren-httpbis-httpssvc]
              Schwartz, B., Bishop, M., and E. Nygren, "HTTPSSVC service
              location and parameter specification via the DNS (DNS
              HTTPSSVC)", draft-nygren-httpbis-httpssvc-03 (work in
              progress), July 2019.

   [OBLIVIOUS]
              "Oblivious DNS Over HTTPS", n.d..

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, DOI 10.17487/RFC4033, March 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4033>.

   [RFC7231]  Fielding, R., Ed. and J. Reschke, Ed., "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Semantics and Content", RFC 7231,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7231, June 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7231>.

   [RFC7858]  Hu, Z., Zhu, L., Heidemann, J., Mankin, A., Wessels, D.,
              and P. Hoffman, "Specification for DNS over Transport
              Layer Security (TLS)", RFC 7858, DOI 10.17487/RFC7858, May
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7858>.

   [RFC8484]  Hoffman, P. and P. McManus, "DNS Queries over HTTPS
              (DoH)", RFC 8484, DOI 10.17487/RFC8484, October 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8484>.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

Authors' Addresses

   Eric Kinnear
   Apple Inc.
   One Apple Park Way
   Cupertino, California 95014
   United States of America

   Email: ekinnear@apple.com



Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                ADNS Privacy                September 2019


   Tommy Pauly
   Apple Inc.
   One Apple Park Way
   Cupertino, California 95014
   United States of America

   Email: tpauly@apple.com


   Chris Wood
   Apple Inc.
   One Apple Park Way
   Cupertino, California 95014
   United States of America

   Email: cawood@apple.com


   Patrick McManus
   Fastly

   Email: mcmanus@ducksong.com





























Kinnear, et al.          Expires March 20, 2020                [Page 19]
